Buffett on the crisis|2009-07-06|money

Selected quotes from "Warren Buffett's most recent letter to shareholders":http://www.berkshirehathaway.com/letters/letters.html.

p(quote). "Economic medicine that was previously meted out by the cupful has recently been dispensed by the barrel. These once-unthinkable dosages will almost certainly bring on unwelcome aftereffects. Their precise nature is anyone’s guess, though one likely consequence is an onslaught of inflation."  "Some years back our competitors were known as "leveraged-buyout operators." But LBO became a  bad name. So in Orwellian fashion, the buyout firms decided to change their moniker. What they did not change,  though, were the essential ingredients of their previous operations, including their cherished fee structures and  love of leverage. 

p(quote). "Their new label became "private equity," a name that turns the facts upside-down: A purchase of a  business by these firms almost invariably results in dramatic reductions in the equity portion of the acquiree’s  capital structure compared to that previously existing. A number of these acquirees, purchased only two to three  years ago, are now in mortal danger because of the debt piled on them by their private-equity buyers. Much of  the bank debt is selling below 70¢ on the dollar, and the public debt has taken a far greater beating. The private-  equity firms, it should be noted, are not rushing in to inject the equity their wards now desperately need. Instead,  they’re keeping their remaining funds very private."

p(quote). "This unprecedented "spread" in the cost of money makes it unprofitable for any lender who doesn’t  enjoy government-guaranteed funds to go up against those with a favored status. Government is determining the  "haves" and "have-nots." That is why companies are rushing to convert to bank holding companies, not a course  feasible for Berkshire. 

p(quote). "Though Berkshire’s credit is pristine – we are one of only seven AAA corporations in the country – our  cost of borrowing is now far higher than competitors with shaky balance sheets but government backing. At the  moment, it is much better to be a financial cripple with a government guarantee than a Gibraltar without one. "

p(quote). "The investment world has gone from underpricing risk to overpricing it. This change has not been  minor; the pendulum has covered an extraordinary arc. A few years ago, it would have seemed unthinkable that  yields like today’s could have been obtained on good-grade municipal or corporate bonds even while risk-free  governments offered near-zero returns on short-term bonds and no better than a pittance on long-terms. When the  financial history of this decade is written, it will surely speak of the Internet bubble of the late 1990s and the  housing bubble of the early 2000s. But the U.S. Treasury bond bubble of late 2008 may be regarded as almost  equally extraordinary."

p(quote). "Clinging to cash equivalents or long-term government bonds at present yields is almost certainly a  terrible policy if continued for long. Holders of these instruments, of course, have felt increasingly comfortable –  in fact, almost smug – in following this policy as financial turmoil has mounted. They regard their judgement  confirmed when they hear commentators proclaim "cash is king," even though that wonderful cash is earning  close to nothing and will surely find its purchasing power eroded over time. 

p(quote). "Approval, though, is not the goal of investing. In fact, approval is often counter-productive because it  sedates the brain and makes it less receptive to new facts or a re-examination of conclusions formed earlier.  Beware the investment activity that produces applause; the great moves are usually greeted by yawns."

p(quote). "Improved "transparency" – a favorite remedy of politicians, commentators and financial regulators for  averting future train wrecks – won’t cure the problems that derivatives pose. I know of no reporting mechanism  that would come close to describing and measuring the risks in a huge and complex portfolio of derivatives.  Auditors can’t audit these contracts, and regulators can’t regulate them. When I read the pages of "disclosure" in  10-Ks of companies that are entangled with these instruments, all I end up knowing is that I don’t know what is  going on in their portfolios (and then I reach for some aspirin)."

p(quote). "A normal stock or bond trade is completed in a few days with one party getting its cash, the other its  securities. Counterparty risk therefore quickly disappears, which means credit problems can’t accumulate. This  rapid settlement process is key to maintaining the integrity of markets. That, in fact, is a reason for NYSE and  NASDAQ shortening the settlement period from five days to three days in 1995. 

p(quote). "Derivatives contracts, in contrast, often go unsettled for years, or even decades, with counterparties  building up huge claims against each other. "Paper" assets and liabilities – often hard to quantify – become  important parts of financial statements though these items will not be validated for many years. Additionally, a  frightening web of mutual dependence develops among huge financial institutions. Receivables and payables by  the billions become concentrated in the hands of a few large dealers who are apt to be highly-leveraged in other  ways as well. Participants seeking to dodge troubles face the same problem as someone seeking to avoid venereal  disease: It’s not just whom you sleep with, but also whom they are sleeping with."

p(quote). "Sleeping around, to continue our metaphor, can actually be useful for large derivatives dealers because  it assures them government aid if trouble hits. In other words, only companies having problems that can infect  the entire neighborhood – I won’t mention names – are certain to become a concern of the state (an outcome, I’m  sad to say, that is proper). From this irritating reality comes The First Law of Corporate Survival for ambitious  CEOs who pile on leverage and run large and unfathomable derivatives books: Modest incompetence simply  won’t do; it’s mindboggling screw-ups that are required. "